I'd like to welcome people to this course,
Introduction to Psychology. My name is Dr. Paul Bloom. I'm professor of
this course. And what this is going to be is a comprehensive
introduction to the study of the human mind. So, we are going to cover a
very, very wide range of topics including brains, children, language,
sex, memory, madness, disgust, racism and love, and many others. We're
going to talk about things like the proper explanation for differences
between men and women; the question of whether animals can learn
language; the puzzle of what grosses us out; the problem of why some of
us eat too much and what we could do to stop; the question of why people
go crazy in groups; research into whether you could trust your childhood
memories; research into why some of us get depressed and others don't.

The style of this is there'll be two lectures a week, as well as course
readings. Now, to do well in the course, you have to attend both the
lectures and do the readings. There will be some overlap. In some cases,
the lectures will be quite linked to the readings. But there will be
some parts of the readings that will not find their way into the
lectures, and some lectures--some entire lectures that will not connect
at all to the readings. So, to pursue this course properly you have to
do both. What this means is that if you miss a class you need to get
notes, and so you should get them from a friend or from the person
sitting next to you. The slides are going to be made available online.
So, one of the things you don't have to do is you don't have to write
this down. You take notes any way you choose, but if you don't get
anything on there it'll be available online. I'm going to post it in a
format which will be black and white and easy to print out so you don't
have to worry about this. But again, attending to the slides is not a
substitute for attending class.

There's a textbook, Peter Gray's _Psychology,_ 5th edition, and there's
also a collection of short readings_, The Norton Reader_ edited by Gary
Marcus. It's an excellent textbook; it's an excellent collection, and
you should get them both. They're available at Labyrinth bookstore on
York Street or you get them online. I should note that last time I
taught the course I used the Marcus _Reader_, and when Professor Marvin
Chun taught his course last semester he used Peter Gray's 5^th^ edition
textbook. So, there may be a lot of used copies floating around. You
should feel free to try to get one of those.

The evaluation goes like this. There is a Midterm and there is a Final.
The Final will not be held in the exam period, because I like to take
long vacations. It will be held the last day of class. The exams will be
multiple choice and short answer, fill in the blank, that sort of thing.
Prior to the exams I will post previous exams online, so you have a
feeling for how these exams work and so on. There will also be review
sessions.

Starting at the beginning of the third week of class – that is not next
week but the week after – on each Monday I'm going to put up a brief
question or set of questions, which you have to answer and your answers
need to be sent to your teaching fellow. And you'll be given a teaching
fellow, assigned one, by Friday. This is not meant to be difficult. It's
not meant to be more than five, ten minutes of work, but the point of
the question--15, 20 minutes of work, but the point of the question is
to motivate people to keep up with the material and do the readings.
These questions will be marked pass, fail. I expect most everybody could
pass all of the questions but it's just to keep you on track and keep
you going.

There is a book review, a short book review, to be written towards near
the end of the class. I'll give details about that later on in the
semester. And there's also an experimental participation requirement,
and next week I'll hand out a piece of paper describing the requirement.
The point of the requirement is to give you all experience actually
seeing what psychological research is about as well as to give us
hundreds of subjects to do our experiments on.

The issue sometimes comes up as to how to do well in the course. Here's
how to do well. Attend all the classes. Keep up with the readings.
Ideally, keep up with the readings before you come to class. And one
thing I would strongly suggest is to form some sort of study groups,
either formally or informally. Have people you could talk to when
the--prior to the exams or--she's patting somebody next to her. I hope
you know him. And in fact, what I'm going to do, not this class because
it's shopping period. I don't know who's coming next class, or what but
I'll set up a few minutes prior, at the beginning of the class, for
people just to introduce themselves to the person next to them so they
have some sort of resource in the class.

Now, this is a large class, and if you don't do anything about it, it
can be very anonymous. And some of you may choose to pursue it that way
and that's totally fine. But what I would suggest you do is establish
some contact with us, either with me or with any of the teaching
fellows, and I'll introduce the teaching fellows sometime next week. You
could talk to us at the beginning or at the end of class. Unless there
are special circumstances, I always try to come at least ten minutes
early, and I am willing to stay late to talk to people. You could come
by during my office hours, which are on the syllabus, and you could send
me e-mail and set up an appointment. I'm very willing to talk to
students about intellectual ideas, about course problems and so on. And
if you see me at some point just on campus, you could introduce yourself
and I'd like to meet people from this class. So, again, I want to stress
you have the option of staying anonymous in this class, but you also
have the option of seeking out and making some sort of contact with us.
Okay. That's the formal stuff of the course.

What's this course about? Unlike a lot of other courses, some people
come to Intro Psychology with some unusual motivations. Maybe you're
crazy and hope to become less crazy [laugher]. Maybe you want to learn
how to study better, improve your sex life, interpret your dreams, and
win friends and influence people [laugher]. Those are not necessarily
bad reasons to take this course and, with the exception of the sex part,
this course might actually help you out with some of these things. The
study of scientific psychology has a lot of insights of real world
relevance to real problems that we face in our everyday lives. And I'm
going to try--and when these issues come up--I'm going to try to stress
them and make you try to think about the extent to which the laboratory
research I'll be talking about can affect your everyday life: how you
study, how you interact with people, how you might try to persuade
somebody of something else, what sort of therapy works best for you. But
the general goals of this course are actually I think even more
interesting than that.

What I want to do is provide a state of the art introduction to the most
important topic that there is: us. How the human mind works, how we
think, what makes us what we are. And we'll be approaching this from a
range of directions. So, traditionally, psychology is often broken up
into the following--into five sub-areas: Neuroscience, which is the
study of the mind by looking at the brain; developmental, which is the
area which I focus mostly on, which is trying to learn about how people
develop and grow and learn; cognitive, which is the one term of the five
that might be unfamiliar to some of you, but it refers to a sort of
computational approach to studying the mind, often viewing the mind on
analogy with a computer and looking at how people do things like
understand language, recognize objects, play games, and so on. There is
social, which is the study of how people act in groups, how people act
with other people. And there is clinical, which is maybe the aspect of
psychology that people think of immediately when they hear psychology,
which is the study of mental health and mental illness. And we'll be
covering all of those areas.

We'll also be covering a set of related areas. I am convinced that you
cannot study the mind solely by looking at the discipline of psychology.
The discipline of psychology spills over to issues of how the mind has
evolved. Economics and game theory are now essential tools for
understanding human thought and human behavior--those issues connecting
to philosophy, computer science, anthropology, literature, theology, and
many, many other domains. So, this course will be wide ranging in that
sense.

At this point I've been speaking in generalities so I want to close this
introductory class by giving five examples of the sorts of topics we'll
be covering. And I'll start with the topic that we'll be covering next
week on Monday – the brain. This is a brain. In fact, it's a specific
person's brain, and what's interesting about the brain is that little
white mark there. It's her brain. It's Terri Schiavo's brain. You
recognize her more from pictures like that. And what a case like this,
where somebody is in a coma, is without consciousness as a result of
damage to the brain, is a stark illustration of the physical nature of
mental life. The physical basis for everything that we normally hold
dear, like free will, consciousness, morality and emotions, and that's
what we'll begin the course with, talking about how a physical thing can
give rise to mental life.

We'll talk a lot about children. This is actually a specific child. It's
my son, Zachary, my younger son, dressed up as Spider-Man, but it is
Halloween. No, it's not Halloween. Oh. Well, there's more to say about
that [laughter]. I study child development for a living and I'm
interested in several questions. So, one question is just the question
of development. Everybody in this room can speak and understand English.
Everybody in this room has some understanding of how the world works,
how physical things behave. Everybody in this room has some
understanding of other people, and how people behave. And the question
that preoccupies developmental psychologists is how do we come to have
this knowledge, and in particular, how much of it is hard-wired,
built-in, innate. And how much of it is the product of culture, of
language, of schooling? And developmental psychologists use many
ingenious methods to try to pull these apart and try to figure out what
are the basic components of human nature.

There's also the question of continuity. To what extent is Zachary, at
that age, going to be that way forever? To what extent is your fate
sealed? To what extent could--if I were to meet you when you were five
years old I could describe the way you are now? The poet William
Wordsworth wrote, "The child is father to the man," and what this means
is that you can see within every child the adult he or she will become.
We will look and ask the question whether this is true. Is it true for
your personality? Is it true for your interests? Is it true for your
intelligence?

Another question having to do with development is what makes us the way
we are? We're different in a lot of ways. The people in this room differ
according to their taste in food. They differ according to their IQs;
whether they're aggressive or shy; whether they're attracted to males,
females, both or neither; whether they are good at music; whether they
are politically liberal or conservative. Why are we different? What's
the explanation for why we're different? And again, this could be
translated in terms of a question of genes and environment. To what
extent are things the result of the genes we possess? To what extent are
our individual natures the result of how we were raised? And to what
extent are they best explained in terms of an interaction? One common
theory, for instance, is that we are shaped by our parents. This was
best summarized most famously by the British poet Philip Larkin who
wrote,

  They mess you up, your mum and dad.
   They may not mean to but they do.
   They fill you with the faults they had
   And add some extra just for you.

Is he right? It's very controversial. You-- It's been a series of--a
huge controversy in the popular culture to the extent of which parents
matter and this is an issue which will preoccupy us for much of the
course.

A different question: What makes somebody attractive? And this can be
asked at all sorts of levels but a simple level is what makes for a
pretty face? So, these are, according to ratings, very attractive faces.
They are not the faces of real people. What's on the screen are computer
generated faces of a Caucasian male and a Caucasian female who don't
exist in the real world. But through using this sort of computer
generation, and then asking people what they think of this face, what
they think of that face, scientists have come to some sense as to what
really makes a face attractive, both within cultures and across
cultures. And that's something which we're going to devote some time to
when we talk about social behavior, and in particular, when we talk
about sex. Not all attractiveness, not all beauty of course, is linked
to sex. So, pandas for instance, like this panda, are notoriously cute,
and I don't have anything to say about it really. It's just a cute
picture [laughter].

Morality is extremely central to our lives, and a deep question, which
we will struggle with throughout most of the course, is the question of
good and evil, evil and good. These three pictures exemplify different
sorts of evil. What you could call institutional evil by somebody
behaving cruelly toward somebody else, perhaps not due to malice but
because of the situation that she's in. It has picture of Osama bin
Laden, a mass murderer or driven by political cause? And then there's
this guy on the bottom. Anybody know who he is? Ted Bundy. Who got that?
Film that man [laughter]. No. Ted Bundy, exactly, and that's before we
get into the technical stuff like crazy-evil, and we're going to have to
come to terms with why some people are like that. And again, the same
situation comes up. Is it part of your nature to be good or bad or is it
largely due to the situation that you fall in? And there's a lot of some
quite spectacular experiments that try to tease that apart.

If we're going to talk about evil, we should also talk about good. These
are pictures of two notoriously good men, Oskar Schindler and Paul
Rusesabagina, each who at different times in history saved the lives of
many, many people at great risk to themselves. Schindler in the
Holocaust, and then the other guy, in – and I can't pronounce his name –
Rusesabagina, in Rwanda. And they both had real good movies made about
them. But what's interesting with these cases is you couldn't have
predicted ahead of time that they would be heroes. And one personal
issue within any of us is what would we do in such situations?

Finally, throughout this course we will discuss mental illness. Now,
towards the end of the class I want to devote a full week to discussing
major disorders like depression and anxiety, because of their profound
social importance. Such disorders are reasonably common in college
students. Many people in this room are currently suffering from a mood
disorder, an anxiety disorder or both, and I won't ask for a show of
hands but I know a lot of people in this room are on some form of
medication for this disorder. And we'll discuss the current research and
why people get these disorders and what's the best way to make them
better.

But I also have a weakness for the less common mental disorders that I
think tell us something really interesting about mental life. So, when
we talk about memory, for instance, we'll talk about disorders in
memory, including some disorders that keep you from forming new memories
as well as disorders of amnesia where you forget the past. And these are
extraordinarily interesting for all sorts of reasons. Early in the
course, in fact I think next week, we will discuss, no, later on in the
course, in the middle of the semester, we will discuss an amazing case
of Phineas Gage.

Phineas Gage was a construction worker about 100 years ago. Due to an
explosion, a metal pipe went through his head like so. Miraculously, he
was not killed. In fact, his friends--it went through his head,
went--ended up 100 feet away, covered with brains and blood. And Phineas
Gage sat down and went, "uh, oh." And then on the way to the hospital
they stopped by a pub to have some cider. He was not blind, he was not
deaf, he was not retarded, but something else happened to him. He lost
his sense of right and wrong. He lost his control. He used to be a
hard-working family man. After the accident he lost all of that. He
couldn't hold a job. He couldn't stay faithful to his wife. He couldn't
speak for five minutes without cursing. He got into fights. He got into
brawls. He got drunk. He lost his control. He ended up on a circus
sideshow traveling through the country with the big steel pipe that went
through his head. And this is again an extraordinary example of how the
brain can give rise to the mind, and how things that go wrong with the
brain can affect you in a serious way.

We'll discuss cases of multiple personality disorder, where people have
more than one personality. And also, discuss the debate over whether
such cases are true or not; whether they could be taken as a real
phenomena or a made-up phenomena, which is--there is a matter of a lot
of controversy. And then, we'll even discuss some rarer cases like
Capgras syndrome. Capgras syndrome is typically – there's hundreds of
cases, not many – hundreds of cases. It's typically the result of some
sort of stroke, and what happens to you is very specific. You develop a
particular delusion, like it's getting dark [lights dim in the room,
laughter follows]. And the delusion is that the people you love the most
have been replaced. They've been replaced by aliens or robots [lights go
on] – thank you – by Martians, by CIA agents, by trained actors and
actresses. But the people--But the idea is, the people you care for the
most you believe are gone. And this could lead to tragic consequences.

Capgras syndrome is associated with a very high level of violence. One
man in Australia a couple of years ago was under the delusion that his
father was replaced with a robot and cut off his head. A related
disorder involving the very same parts of the brain is called Cotard's
syndrome. And Cotard's syndrome is you believe that you're dead; you are
persuaded that you're dead. You're walking around. You know you're
walking around. And you know that there are people around, but you think
that you're dead. And what's striking about these is--it's not--these
are not just sort of big, screwy problems of messed up people. Rather,
they're located--they're related at a pinpoint level to certain parts of
your brain. And we're going to talk about the best modern theories as to
why these syndromes occur.

Now, the reason to be interested in them, again, is not because they're
frequent. They aren't. And it's not because of some sort of gruesome,
morbid curiosity. Rather, by looking at extreme cases, they can help us
best understand normal life. Often by looking at extremes it throws into
sharp contrast things we naturally take for granted. The issue of
psychopathy, of people who, either due to brain damage or because they
are born that way, have no moral understanding, can help us cope with
questions of free will and responsibility; of the relationship or
difference between mental illness and evil. Multiple personality cases
force us to address the question of what is a self. To what extent are
all of us composed of multiple people, and to what extent are we a
single unified person over time? Cases like Capgras are important
because they tell us about how we see the world. They tell us for
instance that there is a difference between recognizing something in the
sense that you could name it, and knowing what it is. And so, by
studying these abnormal cases we could get some insight into regular
life. So, that's the end of the illustration of the example topics. The
syllabus lists many more.

I'll end by telling you that there's a lot of stuff that we'll be
talking about, that I want to talk about, that I am not expert in. And
fortunately, there is a community at Yale of the best scholars and
teachers on the planet. And so, it would be a shame for me not to use
them to cover some of these issues. And so, I'm going to include four
guest lecturers. The first one is Dr. Marvin Chun who teaches the
Introduction to Psychology course in the fall and is my competition. And
he's going to give an amazing lecture on cognitive neuroscience,
especially the cognitive neuroscience of faces. Dr. Susan Nolen-Hoeksema
is the world's authority on depression, and in particular, on sex
differences and depression, and she's going to talk about this towards
the end of the course. Kelly Brownell is going to talk--is head of the
Rudd Center, focuses on obesity, eating disorders, dieting, and he'll
talk about the psychology of food. And finally, Dr. Peter Salovey, Dean
of Yale College, is going to come to us on Valentine's Day and tell us
everything he knows about the mysteries of love. All of these details
are in the syllabus and I'll stick around and answer questions. Hope to
see you next week.

[end of transcript]

back to top
